The goal of this section is to define a reasonable measure on $\mathbb{R}$. This is the culmination of our preparation in [[Carathéodory's Extension Theorem]] and [[Uniqueness of Extensions]].

First, go learn why this is a nontrivial problem.
1. [[Vitali Construction]]

To define a measure, we first need to determine which subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ to include in our $\sigma$-algebra. The most basic and important thing we need to measure are intervals, and we can also handle them well. We will generate the $\sigma$-algebra from open sets.

> [!definition] Definition (Borel $\sigma$-algebra)
> Let $E$ be a Hausdorff topological space. Then, the $\sigma$-algebra generated by the set of open sets in $E$ is called the <span style="color:#0088ff">Borel $\sigma$-algebra</span> of $E$ and is denoted $\mathcal{B}(E)$. The Borel $\sigma$-algebra of $\mathbb{R}$ is simply denoted $\mathcal{B}$.

^7eb63d

> [!definition] Definition (Borel measure)
> A measure $\mu$ on $(E,\mathcal{B}(E))$ is called a <span style="color:#0088ff">Borel measure</span> on $E$. If $\mu(K)<\infty$ for all compact sets $K$, then $\mu$ is called a <span style="color:#0088ff">Radon measure</span> on $E$.

> [!theorem] Theorem (Existence of Lebesgue measure)
> There exists a unique Borel measure $\mu$ on $\mathbb{R}$ that agrees with the lengths of intervals:
> $$
> \mu((a,b])=b-a
> $$
> for all $a<b$. This measure $\mu$ is called the <span style="color:#0088ff">Lebesgue measure</span> on $\mathbb{R}$.

> [!remark]
> Uniqueness is not obvious by [[Uniqueness of Extensions#^440ee1|uniqueness of extensions]], since the measure of the entire space $\mathbb{R}$ is not finite. There is a way to patch this, however.

> [!proof]- Proof of Existence
> We first extend the measure on open intervals to a ring $\mathcal{A}$, and then to the entire Borel $\sigma$-algebra via Carathéodory. 
> 
> Note that the ring $\mathcal{A}$ generated by intervals is simply *finite* unions of disjoint intervals. Therefore, we can set
> $$
> \mu(A)=\sum_{i=1}^{n}(b_{i}-a_{i})
> $$
> if $A=(a_{1},b_{1}]\cup(a_{2},b_{2}]\cup \cdots \cup(a_{n},b_{n}]$. Of course, this presentation is not unique, but we can check that $\mu$ is well-defined (by taking a common refinement) and additive.
> 
> Now, it suffices to show that $\mu$ is *countably* additive to apply Carathéodory. We just need to check that for any increasing sequence $A_{n}\uparrow A$ in $\mathcal{A}$, we have $\mu(A_{n})\to \mu(A)$. If we set $B_{n}=A\setminus A_{n}$, then $B_{n}\in\mathcal{A}$ and we need $\mu(B_{n})\to 0$ by additivity.
> 
> Suppose instead that there is some $\varepsilon$ such that $\mu(B_{n})\geq 2\varepsilon$ for all $n$. Then, for each $n$ we can find some $C_{n}\in\mathcal{A}$ such that $\overline{C}_{n}\subseteq B_{n}$ and $\mu(B_{n}\setminus C_{n})\leq\varepsilon \cdot 2^{-n}$, where once again we are using the epsilon of room trick. Then,
> $$
> \mu(B_{n}\setminus(C_{1}\cap \cdots\cap C_{n}))\leq \mu((B_{1}\setminus C_{1})\cup \cdots \cup(B_{n}\setminus C_{n}))\leq \sum_{n}\varepsilon \cdot 2^{-n}=\varepsilon.
> $$
> Since $\mu(B_{n})\geq 2\varepsilon$, we must have that $\mu(C_{1}\cap \cdots \cap C_{n})\geq\varepsilon$, so $C_{1}\cap \cdots\cap C_{n}\neq \varnothing$, so $K_{n}=\overline{C}_{1}\cap \cdots\cap \overline{C}_{n}\neq \varnothing$. Now $(K_{n}:n\in\mathbb{N})$ is a decreasing sequence of bounded non-empty closed sets in $\mathbb{R}$, but then $\varnothing\neq \bigcap_{n}K_{n}\subseteq \bigcap_{n}B_{n}=\varnothing$, which is not possible.
> 
> The main idea is that we need to have bounded closed sets to reach a contradiction: otherwise we could have a decreasing family of intervals of the form $\left( 0,\frac{1}{n} \right]$ that vanishes, despite each term being nonempty. However, we can closely approximate each $B_{n}$ with a closed $\overline{C}_{n}$ inside of it.

> [!proof]- Proof of Uniqueness
> In order to apply [[Uniqueness of Extensions#^440ee1|uniqueness of extensions]], we need to restrict to sets of finite measure. Suppose $\mu$ and $\tilde{\mu}$ are both measure on $\mathcal{B}$ which respect lengths of intervals. For any $n$, we can write
> $$
> \mu_{n}(A)=\mu((n,n+1]\cap A),\qquad \tilde{\mu}_{n}(A)=\tilde{\mu}((n,n+1]\cap A).
> $$
> Now, $\mu_{n}$ and $\tilde{\mu}_{n}$ are probability measures on $\mathcal{B}$ and they agree on the $\pi$-system of intervals of the form $(a,b]$, which generate $\mathcal{B}$. Hence $\mu_{n}=\tilde{\mu}_{n}$ over all of $\mathcal{B}$. Since this is true for all $n\in\mathbb{Z}$,
> $$
> \mu(A)=\sum_{n}^{}\mu_{n}(A)=\sum_{n}^{}\tilde{\mu}_{n}(A)=\tilde{\mu}(A).
> $$
> 

^70558a


Finally, the condition that characterizes the Lebesgue measure $\mu$ on $\mathbb{R}$ allows us to check that $\mu$ is <span style="color:#0088ff">translation invariant</span>, meaning that for any $x \in\mathbb{R}$ and $B\in\mathcal{B}$, if we define
$$
\mu_{x}(B)=\mu(B+x),\quad B+x=\{ b+x:b\in\mathcal{B} \},
$$
then $\mu_{x}((a,b])=(b+x)-(a+x)=b-a$, so $\mu_{x}=\mu$ by uniqueness. Hence $\mu(B+x)=\mu(B)$. Once we restrict $\mu$ to $\mathcal{B}((0,1])$, it still has translation invariance if we take the points modulo one.

---

**Next:** [[Probability Spaces]]