Intuitively, the goal of measure theory is to define the "size" of sets. Unfortunately, we encounter [[Vitali Construction|difficulties]] trying to simply assign a reasonable measure to, say, all subsets of the interval $[0,1]$. Instead, we must restrict our attention to "nice" subsets.

Work over a set $E$. Then, $\sigma$-algebras tell you what these "nice" subsets of $E$ are. There are many possible $\sigma$-algebras over a particular set $E$, though some will be more natural than others.

>[!definition] Definition ($\sigma$-algebra)
>A <span style="color:#0088ff">$\sigma$-algebra</span> $\mathcal{E}$ is a nonempty set of subsets of $E$ closed under complementation and countable unions.
>
>In other words, for all $A\in\mathcal{E}$ and sequences $(A_n:n\in\mathbb{N})\in\mathcal{E}$,
>$$A^c\in\mathcal{E}, \qquad\bigcup_{n}A_n\in\mathcal{E}.$$

^f1d37f

>[!definition] Definition (Measurable space)
>If $\mathcal{E}$ is a [[Measure Spaces#^f1d37f|$\sigma$-algebra]] on $E$, then we call the pair $(E,\mathcal{E})$ a <span style="color:#0088ff">measurable space</span>. Any $A\in\mathcal{E}$ is then called a <span style="color:#0088ff">measurable set</span>.

^c0c7fc

>[!question]
>Show that $\varnothing\in\mathcal{E}$. Then, show that $\mathcal{E}$ is closed under countable intersection as well.

>[!notation]
>As Evan Chen points out in [Napkin](https://venhance.github.io/napkin/Napkin.pdf): this terminology is phonetically confusing, because it can be confused with "measure space" later. The way to think about is that "measur*able* spaces have a $\sigma$-algebra, so we *could* try to put a measure on it, but we *haven’t*, yet."

Alright, well now that we know which sets are potentially measurable, let's assign a measure to them!

>[!definition] Definition (Measure)
>A <span style="color:#0088ff">measure</span> $\mu$ on a [[Measure Spaces#^c0c7fc|measurable space]] $(E,\mathcal{E})$ is a function $\mu:\mathcal{E}\to[0,\infty]$ with $\mu(\varnothing)=0$ that satisfies <span style="color:#0088ff">countable additivity</span>, i.e. for any sequence $(A_n:n\in\mathbb{N})$ of disjoint elements of $\mathcal{E}$,
>$$\mu\left(\bigsqcup_{n}A_n\right)=\sum_n\mu(A_n).$$

^dde3c4

>[!definition] Definition (Measure space)
>Given a [[Measure Spaces#^dde3c4|measure]] $\mu$ on a [[Measure Spaces#^c0c7fc|measurable space]] $(E,\mathcal{E})$, the triple $(E,\mathcal{E},\mu)$ is called a <span style="color:#0088ff">measure space</span>.

^607777

>[!question]
>What would go wrong if we imposed *uncountable* additivity?

> [!proposition]
> Let $(A_{n}:n\in\mathbb{N})$ be elements of $\mathcal{E}$ in a measure space $(E,\mathcal{E},\mu)$. Then, the following hold:
> * **Continuity from below:** If $A_{i}\uparrow A$, i.e. $A_{1}\subseteq A_{2}\subseteq \cdots$ and $A=\bigcup_{i=1}^\infty A_{i}$, then $\mu(A_{i})\uparrow\mu(A)$.
> * **Continuity from above:** If $A_{i}\downarrow A$, i.e. $A_{1}\supseteq A_{2}\supseteq \cdots$ and $A=\bigcap_{i=1}^{\infty}A_{i}$, and also $\mu(A_{1})<\infty$, then $\mu(A_{i})\downarrow \mu(A)$.

> [!remark]
> The finiteness condition is necessary. For example, if $\Omega=\mathbb{N}$ and $\mu$ is the measure that assigns each subset the number of elements in it, then $A_{n}=\{ n,n+1,\dots \}$ is a sequence of sets all with measure $\infty$, but the intersection has measure zero!

Finally, an important fact about how we describe $\sigma$-algebras. This is analogous to bases for vector spaces or topologies.

>[!definition] Definition ($\sigma$-algebra generation)
>Let $\mathcal{A}$ be a set of subsets of $E$. We call
>$$\sigma(\mathcal{A})=\{A\subseteq E:A\in\mathcal{E}\text{ for all }\sigma\text{-algebras }\mathcal{E}\text{ containing }\mathcal{A}\}$$
>the <span style="color:#0088ff">$\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathcal{A}$</span>.
>
>In other words, this is the smallest $\sigma$-algebra containing $\mathcal{A}$, created by intersecting all such $\sigma$-algebras.

>[!question]
>Show that the intersection of a set of $\sigma$-algebras on the same set $E$ is also a $\sigma$-algebra. On the other hand, show by example that the union of two $\sigma$-algebras on the same set need not be a $\sigma$-algebra.

>[!proof]- Proof (just check it)
>Suppose $\mathcal{S}$ is a set of $\sigma$-algebras on $E$, and let $\mathcal{E}^*$ denote the intersection of all the sets in $\mathcal{S}$. We just need to check three conditions:
>* $\varnothing\in\mathcal{E}^*$ since $\varnothing\in\mathcal{E}$ for all $\mathcal{E}\in\mathcal{S}$ (as each $\mathcal{E}$ is itself a $\sigma$-algebra).
>* If $A\in\mathcal{E}^*$, then $A^c\in\mathcal{E}^*$. This is because $A$ must be in all $\mathcal{E}\in\mathcal{S}$, and since each $\mathcal{E}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra, we have that $A^c\in\mathcal{E}$ for all $\mathcal{E}\in\mathcal{S}$ as well; thus $A^c\in\mathcal{E}^*$.
>* If $(A_n:n\in\mathbb{N})\in\mathcal{E}^*$, then every $A_i$ is in all $\mathcal{E}\in\mathcal{S}$. Since each $\mathcal{E}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra, this means that $\bigcup_{n\in\mathbb{N}}A_n\in\mathcal{E}$ for all $\mathcal{E}\in\mathcal{S}$. Hence $\bigcup_{n\in\mathbb{N}}A_n\in\mathcal{E}^*$ as well.
>
>Therefore the intersection of a set of $\sigma$-algebras on the same set $E$ is also a $\sigma$-algebra on that set.
>
>Finally, we need to exhibit an example of the union of two $\sigma$-algebras on the same set not being a $\sigma$-algebra. We can consider $E=\{a,b,c\}$, and take
>$$\mathcal{E}_1=\{\varnothing,\{a\},\{b,c\},\{a,b,c\}\},\qquad\mathcal{E}_2=\{\varnothing,\{b\},\{a,c\},\{a,b,c\}\}.$$
>Now, their union is
>$$\mathcal{E}_1\cup\mathcal{E}_2=\{\varnothing, \{a\}, \{b\}, \{b, c\}, \{a, c\}, \{a, b, c\}\}.$$
>This is clearly not a $\sigma$-algebra, since, for example, $\{a\}\cup\{b\}=\{a,b\}\not\in\mathcal{E}_1\cup\mathcal{E}_2$.

>[!question]
>Show that the following sets of subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ all generate the same $\sigma$-algebra.
>1. $\{ (a,b):a<b \}$,
>2. $\{ (a,b]:a<b \}$,
>3. $\{ (-\infty,b]:b\in\mathbb{R} \}$.

> [!proof]-
> It suffices to show that each of these sets can generate any other one.
> * $1\implies 2$: We can use countable intersection to generate a single point: intersect the intervals $\left\{  \left( x-\frac{1}{n}, x+\frac{1}{n} \right) : n\in\mathbb{N} \right\}$ to get $\{ x \}$ for any $x\in\mathbb{R}$. Then, simply union any interval $(a,b)$ with $\{ b \}$ to get $(a,b]$.
> * $2\implies 1$: We can similarly generate any point by taking the countable intersection of intervals $\left\{  \left( x-\frac{1}{n},x \right] : n \in\mathbb{N} \right\}$; this gives $\{ x \}$ for any $x \in\mathbb{R}$. Then, simply take $(a,b]\setminus \{ b \}$ to get $(a,b)$.
> * $2\implies 3$: Simply take the countable union of the intervals $\{ (b-n,b-n+1] : n\in\mathbb{N} \}$; this immediately gives $(-\infty,b]$.
> * $3\implies 2$: Simply take $(a,b]=(-\infty,b]\setminus(-\infty,a]$.
>   
> Therefore, all three of these subsets of $\mathbb{R}$ generate the same $\sigma$-algebra.

> [!question]
> What is the $\sigma$-algebra generated by singleton subsets?

---

**Next:** [[Discrete Measure Theory]]
