## Definitions

>[!definition] Definition ($\pi$-system)
>Let $\mathcal{A}$ be a set of subsets of $E$. We say that $\mathcal{A}$ is a <span style="color:#0088ff">$\pi$-system</span> if it contains the empty set and is closed under finite intersections, i.e. $\varnothing\in\mathcal{A}$ and $A\cap B\in\mathcal{A}$ for all $A,B\in\mathcal{A}$.

^232a53

>[!definition] Definition ($\lambda$-system)
>Let $\mathcal{A}$ be a set of subsets of $E$. We say that $\mathcal{A}$ is a <span style="color:#0088ff">$\lambda$-system</span> (or <span style="color:#0088ff">$d$-system</span>) if $E\in\mathcal{A}$ and if for all $A,B\in\mathcal{A}$ with $A\subseteq B$ and all increasing sequences $(A_{n}:n\in\mathbb{N})\in\mathcal{A}$,
>$$B\setminus A\in\mathcal{A},\qquad \bigcup_{n}A_{n}\in\mathcal{A}.$$ 

^32fdbb

## Basic Properties

>[!question]
>Show that the intersection of $\pi$-systems on the same set $E$ is a $\pi$-system, and the intersection of $\lambda$-systems on the same set $E$ is a $\lambda$-system. This allows you to generate $\pi$- or $\lambda$-systems using any set of subsets.

>[!question]
>Show that if $\mathcal{A}$ is both a $\pi$-system and a $\lambda$-system, then $\mathcal{A}$ is a [[Measure Spaces#^f1d37f|$\sigma$-algebra]].

>[!question]
>Show that a $\pi$-system is a [[Rings and Algebras#^aed1d6|ring]].

## Some Intuition

Some of this may be more clear after reading the subsequent section on [[Sierpiński–Dynkin's π-λ Theorem]].

>[!idea]
>A $\lambda$-system contains all reasonable "measure deductions".

In particular, an equivalent way to write the conditions for a $\lambda$-system is as follows:

1. $\varnothing\in\mathcal{A}$,
2. $A\in\mathcal{A}\implies A^{c}\in\mathcal{A}$,
3. $(A_{n}:n\in\mathbb{N})\in\mathcal{A}$ disjoint $\implies \bigsqcup_{n}A_{n}\in\mathcal{A}$.

If I told you that an event $A$ occurs with probability $\frac{1}{3}$, you better be able to tell me that the complement event $A^{c}$ occurs with probability $\frac{2}{3}$. Similarly, if I told you that some disjoint events occur with certain probabilities, you better be able to tell me that the probability at least one of them occurs is just the sum of those probabilities. These correspond to the conditions exactly.

On the other hand, imagine I told you that event $A$ occurs with probability $\frac{2}{3}$ and event $B$ occurs with probability $\frac{1}{5}$, and then asked you for the probability of $A\cup B$ or $A\cap B$. You cannot tell me the answer with certainty! That's why $A\cup B\in\mathcal{A}$ or $A\cap B\in\mathcal{A}$ are *not* conditions of a $\lambda$-system.

>[!idea]
>A $\pi$-system contains the minimum amount of information to determine the measure on all elements of the $\sigma$-algebra it generates.

For example, if you had events $A$ and $B$, then in the full $\sigma$-algebra, you would need to assign a measure to $A\cup B$ and $A\cap B$ (it is indeterminate without further specification). It turns out that it suffices to say what $\mu$ is on a $\pi$-system$\dots$ the rest can be *deduced*, à la $\lambda$-system.

This has quite important ramifications. For example, why is it that we can fully describe a probability distribution with a cumulative distribution function? A priori, we should need to specify the measure on every single element of the $\sigma$-algebra generated by open intervals in $\mathbb{R}$. However, it turns out that $\{ (-\infty,x]: x\in\mathbb{R} \}$ forms a generating $\pi$-system, so specifying the measures on these elements (i.e. values of the CDF) is enough to fully determine the entire probability distribution.

On the other hand, you can't just specify these values willy-nilly. In order to extend to a valid measure on the full $\sigma$-algebra, we need the pre-measure on the ring to be valid. This is the *only* sanity check, however: if you get a valid pre-measure, you can extend to a measure, via Carathéodory.

---

**Next:** [[Sierpiński–Dynkin's π-λ Theorem]]
