Last, we explored [[Carathéodory's Extension Theorem|Carathéodory's extension theorem]], which allows us to extend premeasures on rings to measures on $\sigma$-algebras. In this section, we will prove a useful theorem showing that such extensions are unique.

There is some prerequisite material.

1. [[Pi and Lambda Systems]]
2. [[Sierpiński–Dynkin's π-λ theorem]]

## Statement

>[!theorem] Theorem (Uniqueness of Extensions)
>Suppose $\mu_{1},\mu_{2}$ are measures on $(E,\mathcal{E})$ with $\mu_{1}(E)=\mu_{2}(E)<\infty$. If $\mu_{1}$ and $\mu_{2}$ agree on some $\pi$-system $\mathcal{A}$ generating $\mathcal{E}$, then $\mu_{1}$ agrees with $\mu_{2}$ on $\mathcal{E}$.

^440ee1

## Proof

Let $\mathcal{L}$ be the subset of $\mathcal{E}$ on which $\mu_{1}$ and $\mu_{2}$ agree. Then $\mathcal{A}\subseteq \mathcal{L}$.

>[!claim]
>$\mathcal{L}$ forms a $\lambda$-system.

>[!proof]-
>$E\in\mathcal{L}$ by assumption. Now, suppose that $A,B\in\mathcal{L}$ with $A\subseteq B$. By additivity,
>$$\mu_{i}(A)+\mu_{i}(B\setminus A)=\mu_{i}(B)<\infty\implies\mu_{i}(B\setminus A)=\mu_{i}(B)-\mu_{i}(A),$$
>so $B\setminus A\in\mathcal{L}$ as well. Note the application of the finiteness of $\mu_{i}(E)$ here.
>
>Finally, suppose that $A_{n}\in\mathcal{L}$ for $n\in\mathbb{N}$ with $A_{n}\uparrow A$. However,
>$$\mu_{1}(A)=\lim_{ n \to \infty } \mu_{1}(A_{n})=\lim_{ n \to \infty } \mu_{2}(A_{n})=\mu_{2}(A),$$
>so $\bigcup_{n}A_{n}=A\in\mathcal{L}$ as well.

Since $\mathcal{L}\supseteq\mathcal{A}$ is a $\lambda$-system containing the $\pi$-system $\mathcal{A}$, by [[Sierpiński–Dynkin's π-λ theorem|Sierpiński–Dynkin's $\pi$-$\lambda$ theorem]], it also contains the $\sigma$-algebra generated by $\mathcal{A}$, which is just $\mathcal{E}$. Hence $\mathcal{L}=\mathcal{E}$ exactly.

>[!idea] Idea (Proof Pattern)
>In the proofs of both the $\pi$-$\lambda$ theorem and the above uniqueness of extensions theorem, we want to show that on the $\lambda$-system generated by some set of subsets of $\mathcal{A}$, a certain property is satisfied (it is a $\pi$-system, or $\mu_{1}=\mu_{2}$), given that it is already satisfied on $\mathcal{A}$.
>
>In order to do this, we consider the superset of $\mathcal{A}$ containing all elements with this given property, and then show it is a $\lambda$-system.

---

**Next:** [[Lebesgue Measure]]
