In this section, we introduce measurable functions. These are to measurable spaces as continuous functions are to topological spaces.

## Definition and Basic Properties

> [!definition] Definition (Measurable functions)
> Let $(E,\mathcal{E})$ and $(G,\mathcal{G})$ be [[Measure Spaces#^c0c7fc|measurable spaces]]. A function $f: E \to G$ is called <span style="color:#0088ff">measurable</span> if $f^{-1}(A)\in \mathcal{E}$ whenever $A\in \mathcal{G}$. 

^3c3914

If $(G,\mathcal{G})=(\mathbb{R},\mathcal{B})$, the [[Lebesgue Measure#^7eb63d|Borel $\sigma$-algebra]], then we simply call $f$ a measurable function on $E$ (the codomain is implied). Meanwhile, if $(G,\mathcal{G})=([0,\infty],\mathcal{B}([0,\infty]))$, we call $f$ a nonnegative measurable function on $E$. In the nonnegative case, we allow $f$ to equal $\infty$, unlike the real case.

If $\mathcal{E}=\mathcal{B}(E)$ where $E$ is a Hausdorff topological space, then a measurable function on $E$ is called Borel.

> [!proposition] Proposition (Pushing and pulling)
> For any function $f$, the set $\{ f^{-1}(A):A\in \mathcal{G} \}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $E$ and $\{ A\subseteq G:f^{-1}(A)\in \mathcal{E} \}$ is a $\sigma$-algebra on $G$.

> [!proof]-
> This is simply because the preimage preserves set operations
> $$
> f^{-1}\left( \bigcup_{i}^{}A_{i} \right) =\bigcup_{i}^{}f^{-1}(A_{i}),\quad f^{-1}(G\setminus A)=E\setminus f^{-1}(A).
> $$

> [!question]
> If $\mathcal{A}$ generates $\mathcal{G}$ and $f^{-1}(A)\in \mathcal{E}$ for all $A\in \mathcal{A}$, show that $f$ is measurable.

For example, if $G=\mathbb{R}$, then $\mathcal{B}$ is generated by intervals $(-\infty,y]$ over $y\in \mathbb{R}$, so to show that $f: E\to \mathbb{R}$ is Borel measurable, we just need that $\{ x \in E:f(x)\leq y \}\in \mathcal{E}$ for all $y\in \mathbb{R}$.

> [!example] Example (Continuous functions are measurable)
> If $E$ is a topological space and $f: E\to \mathbb{R}$ is continuous, then if $U$ is open in $\mathbb{R}$, $f^{-1}(U)$ is open in $E$ (and hence measurable). Since the open sets $U$ generate $\mathcal{B}$, any continuous function is measurable.

One important example is indicator functions over measurable sets. As you'll see soon, these essentially "generate" all bounded measurable functions.

> [!example] Example (Indicator functions)
> For any $A\subseteq E$, we can define the <span style="color:#0088ff">indicator function</span> $\mathbf{1}_{A}$ of $A$ as the function from $E$ to $\{ 0,1 \}$ which equals $1$ on values in $A$ and $0$ otherwise. The indicator function of any measurable set is measurable.

> [!question]
> Show that the composition of measurable functions is measurable.

We can also generate $\sigma$-algebras from functions.

> [!definition] Definition (Generating $\sigma$-algebras from functions)
> Given a family of functions $f_{i}:E\to G$ indexed by $i\in I$, we can consider the coarsest selection of measurable sets on $E$ such that all $f_{i}$ become measurable:
> $$
> \mathcal{E}=\sigma \left( f_{i}^{-1}(A):A\in \mathcal{G},i\in I \right). 
> $$
> We call $\mathcal{E}$ the <span style="color:#0088ff">$\sigma$-algebra generated by $(f_i:i\in I)$</span>.  

^7434a6

## Monotone Class Theorem

In this section, we prove a useful theorem for generalizing statements about simple classes of functions to arbitrary bounded, measurable functions.

> [!theorem] Theorem (Monotone Class Theorem)
> Let $(E,\mathcal{E})$ be a measurable space and let $\mathcal{A}$ be a $\pi$-system generating $\mathcal{E}$. Let $\mathcal{V}$ be a vector space of bounded functions $f:E\to \mathbb{R}$ such that
> 
> 1. $\mathbf{1}\in \mathcal{V}$ and $\mathbf{1}_{A}\in \mathcal{V}$ for all $A\in \mathcal{A}$.
> 2. If $f_{n}\in \mathcal{V}$ for all $n$ and $f$ is bounded with $0\leq f_{n}\uparrow f$, then $f\in \mathcal{V}$.
> 
> Then, $\mathcal{V}$ contains every bounded measurable function.

> [!proof]-
> Let $\mathcal{L}=\{ A\in \mathcal{E}:\mathbf{1}_{A}\in \mathcal{V} \}$. Then $\mathcal{L}$ is a $\lambda$-system containing $\mathcal{A}$, so $\mathcal{L}=\mathcal{E}$. Since $\mathcal{V}$ is a vector space, it contains all finite linear combinations of indicator functions on measurable sets.
> 
> If $f$ is a bounded and nonnegative measurable function, then $f_{n}=2^{-n}\lfloor 2^{n}f \rfloor$ for $n\in \mathbb{N}$ are all in $\mathcal{V}$ (i.e. round down to dyadic rational grid size), and $0\leq f_{n}\uparrow f$; hence $f\in \mathcal{V}$. Now, any bounded measurable function is the difference of two such nonnegative measurable functions, hence in $\mathcal{V}$.

---

**Next:** [[Image Measures]]